DOCSUP-6074: Documented DETACH TABLE PERMANENTLY (#20554)
ClickHouse/ClickHouse: docs/en/sql-reference/statements/detach.md

# DETACH Statement {#detach}

> Deletes information about the `name` table from the server. The server stops knowing about the table’s existence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Deletes information about the table or view from the server. The server stops knowing about their existence.
```

Syntax:

``` sql

> DETACH TABLE [IF EXISTS] [db.]name [ON CLUSTER cluster]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DETACH TABLE|VIEW [IF EXISTS] [db.]name [PERMANENTLY] [ON CLUSTER cluster]
```

```

> This does not delete the table’s data or metadata. On the next server launch, the server will read the metadata and find out about the table again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Detaching does not delete the table’s data or metadata. If the table was not detached `PERMANENTLY`, on the next server launch the server will read the metadata and recall the table again. If the table was detached `PERMANENTLY`, there will be no automatic recall. 

Whether the table was detached permanently or not, in both cases you can reattach it using the [ATTACH](../../sql-reference/statements/attach.md) query (with the exception of system tables, which do not have metadata stored for them).
```

> Similarly, a “detached” table can be re-attached using the [ATTACH](../../sql-reference/statements/attach.md) query (with the exception of system tables, which do not have metadata stored for them).
> 
> ## DETACH PERMANENTLY {#detach-permanently}
> 
> Deletes information about `name` table or view from the server. Permanently detached tables won't automatically reappear after the server restart.
> 
> Syntax:
> 
> ``` sql
> DETACH TABLE/VIEW [IF EXISTS] [db.]name PERMAMENTLY [ON CLUSTER cluster]
> ```
> 
> This statement does not delete the table’s data or metadata.
> 
> Permanently detached table or view can be reattached with [ATTACH](../../sql-reference/statements/attach.md) query and can be shown with [SHOW CREATE TABLE](../../sql-reference/statements/show.md#show-create-table) query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

# DETACH Statement {#detach}

> Deletes information about the table or view from the server. The server stops knowing about their existence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Deletes information about the table or materialized view from the server. The server stops knowing about their existence.
```

Syntax:

``` sql
DETACH TABLE|VIEW [IF EXISTS] [db.]name [PERMANENTLY] [ON CLUSTER cluster]
```

> Detaching does not delete the data or metadata for the table or view. If the table or view was not detached `PERMANENTLY`, on the next server launch the server will read the metadata and recall the table/view again. If the table or view was detached `PERMANENTLY`, there will be no automatic recall. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Detaching does not delete the data or metadata for the table or materialized view. If the table or view was not detached `PERMANENTLY`, on the next server launch the server will read the metadata and recall the table/view again. If the table or view was detached `PERMANENTLY`, there will be no automatic recall. 
```

Whether the table was detached permanently or not, in both cases you can reattach it using the [ATTACH](../../sql-reference/statements/attach.md). System log tables can be also attached back (e.g. `query_log`, `text_log`, etc). Other system tables can't be reattached. On the next server launch the server will recall those tables again.

`ATTACH MATERIALIZED VIEW` doesn't work with short syntax (without `SELECT`), but you can attach it using the `ATTACH TABLE` query.

Note that you can not detach permanently the table which is already detached (temporary). But you can attach it back and then detach permanently again. 

Also you can not [DROP](../../sql-reference/statements/drop.md#drop-table) the detached table, or [CREATE TABLE](../../sql-reference/statements/create/table.md) with the same name as detached permanently, or replace it with the other table with [RENAME TABLE](../../sql-reference/statements/rename.md) query.

**Example**

Query:

``` sql
CREATE TABLE test ENGINE = Log AS SELECT * FROM numbers(10);

DETACH TABLE test;

> SELECT * FROM TEST;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SELECT * FROM test;
```

> Query:
> 
> ``` sql
> CREATE TABLE test ENGINE = Log AS SELECT * FROM numbers(10);
> 
> DETACH TABLE test;
> 
> SELECT * FROM TEST;
> ```
> 
> Result:
> 
> ``` text
> Ok.
> 
> Ok.
> 
> Received exception from server (version 21.3.1):
> Code: 60. DB::Exception: Received from localhost:9000. DB::Exception: Table default.TEST doesn't exist.
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Creating a table:

``` sql
CREATE TABLE test ENGINE = Log AS SELECT * FROM numbers(10);
SELECT * FROM test;
```
Result:
```text
┌─number─┐
│               0 │
│               1 │
│               2 │
│               3 │
│               4 │
│               5 │
│               6 │
│               7 │
│               8 │
│               9 │
└───────┘
```
Detaching the table:

```sql
DETACH TABLE test;
SELECT * FROM test;
```
Result:

``` text
Received exception from server (version 21.3.1):
Code: 60. DB::Exception: Received from localhost:9000. DB::Exception: Table default.test doesn't exist.
```

> 

Reviewer: Then attach the table again:

```sql
ATTACH TABLE test;
SELECT * FROM test;
```

Result:
```text
┌─number─┐
│      0 │
│      1 │
│      2 │
│      3 │
│      4 │
│      5 │
│      6 │
│      7 │
│      8 │
│      9 │
└────────┘
```

# DETACH Statement {#detach}

> Deletes information about the table or materialized view from the server. The server stops knowing about their existence.

Reviewer 2: It doesn't delete anything. May be smth like "Unregister the table / Makes the server forget about the table"
